# Spring Vault Workshop

[Link for slides](goo.gl/WUOc7D)

## What is Vault?

HashiCorp’s Vault provides a central place to manage external secret data for applications across all environments. Vault can manage static and dynamic secrets such as application data, username/password for remote applications/resources and provide credentials for external services such as MySQL, PostgreSQL, Apache Cassandra, Consul, AWS and more.

## Requirements

- Java 6 or higher
- Vault 0.5 or higher

### Installing Vault
1. Run ``` brew install vault ```. This will update brew and install Vault. At the time of writing it will be 0.7.2

2. Run ``` vault version ```. It should return the version.

### Running up a Vault server

1. Run ``` vault server -dev ```. This will start a server with dev purposes only in the foreground.
2. Run ``` export VAULT_ADDR='http://127.0.0.1:8200' ``` in a separate terminal. By default Vault address is set to HTTPS, since we are using dev server we need to set it to HTTP version.
3. Verify server is running and reachable by running ``` vault status ```.

Important things about this server:
- TLS is not supported
- Backend for secrets/passwords is in-memory
- Is not a server ready for production environments

### Storing a secret with Vault only

Goal: To know more about Vault operations. 

- Run ``` vault write secret/hello value=world ```3

- Run ``` vault read secret/hello ```. Stored secrets will be shown.
- Add -format=json to previous sentence to get output as json

- Run ``` vault delete secret/hello ```. Delete secret

## What is Spring Vault?

Spring Vault is a framework from Spring that provides familiar Spring abstractions and client-side support for accessing, storing and revoking secrets interacting with Vault.

### What has Spring Vault to offer?

- @VaultPropertySource annotation to enable loading secrets from Vault
- EnvironmentVaultConfiguration which is an AutoConfiguration class for creating a context for Vault (connection, authentication)
- VaultTemplate which is a class that provides methods for Vault common operations (write, read, delete)

### Exercise 1. Reading a secret with Spring

1. Create a secret on your local vault server
2. Open the exercise1 folder in your IDE. 
3. Complete the missing code for reading the Vault secret.
4. Make sure to print to standard output the value Vault returns.

### Exercise 2. Write and read a secret from Spring.

1. Open the exercise2 folder in your IDE.
2. Complete the missing code for reading, writing and delete a Vault secret.
3. Run and make sure it's working. Verify in Vault local server

### Secrets backends and dynamic secrets

A backend in Vault is a strategy to create/read/store a secret. There are several backends already built-in but ton of them are coming. 

Existent backends:
- AWS
- Consul
- Database
- Generic
- RabbitMQ
- SSH, etc

A dynamic secret is a secret which is generated by a backend on demand. It is not static, it can be revoked at any time or auto-revoked.

## Play with the database backend

- Run ``` vault mount database ```. Now the database backend is mounted at ```database``` path. 

**For the next instructions you will need a running MySQL instance (locally, docker container or cloud)**

- Run ``` vault write database/config/mysql \
    plugin_name=mysql-database-plugin \
    connection_url="root:mysql@tcp(127.0.0.1:3306)/" \
    allowed_roles="readonly" ```. **Make sure to replace the user and password in the url connection string.**

The previous command will configure MySQL database backend. 

- Run ``` vault write database/roles/readonly \
    db_name=mysql \
    creation_statements="CREATE USER '{{name}}'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY '{{password}}';GRANT SELECT ON *.* TO '{{name}}'@'%';" \
    default_ttl="1h" \
    max_ttl="24h" ```. 

This will define the statement to be used every time a user/password is created by the MySQL backend.

- Now, create a user/password using the MySQL backend. Run ```vault read database/creds/readonly ``` to get a fully functional credentials.
- Verify that you can connect to MySQL using the returned credentials. 

### Exercise 3. Connect to a database using a dynamic secret generated with Spring Vault

**For this exercise you will need to had setup a database backend in your vault server as mentioned in previous steps**

- Open exercise3 folder in your IDE.
- Complete the missing code and verify how it gets a new database user each time.

## Sealing/Unsealing a vault

To seal a vault means it can't be accessed anymore until it gets unsealed again. 

- Run ``` vault seal ``` to seal the vault
- Try to run of the exercises above and see what happens
- Run ``` vault unsealt ``` to unseal the vault

### Authentication

Vault supports different types of authentication. The most common are listed below:

- Token
- Username/password
- Github
- AWS
- AppId / AppRole
- LDAP
- TLS certificates


